_tabs/projects.md, before:

---
icon: fa-solid fa-folder-tree
order: 1
---

<p align="justify">This page is a collection of several projects I made either
at the university or by myself. Most of them do not have other purpose than my
own enjoyment of perfecting my computer skills, learning new technologies and
concepts. Code and software quality vary from project to project, as some of
them were created a long time ago &#128116;.</p>

<p align="justify">All projects here are 100% mine, but as long you credit me
you can reuse the source code for your own purposes.</p>

## Cellular Automata

### Brian's Brain

According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brian's_Brain):
> Brian's Brain is a cellular automaton devised by Brian Silverman, which is 
very similar to his Seeds rule. 

<p align="justify">
I originally made the project because I was interested in learning Vulkan while
improving my skills in Rust. The hardest part was to set up the graphics
pipeline and decomposing the shapes in vertices that can be processed by the
GPU.</p>

- **Tech Stack:** Rust, Vulkan
- **Source Code:** [GitHub](https://gitlab.com/boreec/brian-s-brain), [GitLab](https://github.com/boreec/Brian-s-Brain)
- **Demo:** [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r0fTs15-Qg0)

### Game of Life

According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life):
> The Game of Life, also known simply as Life, is a cellular automaton devised
by the British mathematician John Horton Conway in 1970. It is a zero-player
game,meaning that its evolution is determined by its initial state, requiring
no further input. One interacts with the Game of Life by creating an initial
configuration and observing how it evolves. It is Turing complete and can 
simulate a universal constructor or any other Turing machine. 

This one is probably a classic. I wrote many versions in several languages, but
for some reason I only managed to find the one I made during my multi-agent
systems class at University while we were learning NetLogo.

- **Tech Stack:** NetLogo
- **Source Code:** [GitLab](https://gitlab.com/boreec/gol_1)

## Games

### Pong

### Snake

### Space Race

### Tetris

Commit message:

add Pong entry to projects

_tabs/projects.md, after:

---
icon: fa-solid fa-folder-tree
order: 1
---

<p align="justify">This page is a collection of several projects I made either
at the university or by myself. Most of them do not have other purpose than my
own enjoyment of perfecting my computer skills, learning new technologies and
concepts. Code and software quality vary from project to project, as some of
them were created a long time ago &#128116;.</p>

<p align="justify">All projects here are 100% mine, but as long you credit me
you can reuse the source code for your own purposes.</p>

## Cellular Automata

### Brian's Brain

According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Brian's_Brain):
> Brian's Brain is a cellular automaton devised by Brian Silverman, which is 
very similar to his Seeds rule. 

<p align="justify">
I originally made the project because I was interested in learning Vulkan while
improving my skills in Rust. The hardest part was to set up the graphics
pipeline and decomposing the shapes in vertices that can be processed by the
GPU.</p>

- **Tech Stack:** Rust, Vulkan
- **Source Code:** [GitHub](https://gitlab.com/boreec/brian-s-brain), [GitLab](https://github.com/boreec/Brian-s-Brain)
- **Demo:** [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r0fTs15-Qg0)

### Game of Life

According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Conway%27s_Game_of_Life):
> The Game of Life, also known simply as Life, is a cellular automaton devised
by the British mathematician John Horton Conway in 1970. It is a zero-player
game,meaning that its evolution is determined by its initial state, requiring
no further input. One interacts with the Game of Life by creating an initial
configuration and observing how it evolves. It is Turing complete and can 
simulate a universal constructor or any other Turing machine. 

<p align="justify">This one is probably a classic. I wrote many versions in
several languages, but for some reason I only managed to find the one I made
during my multi-agent systems class at university while we were learning
NetLogo.</p>

- **Tech Stack:** NetLogo
- **Source Code:** [GitLab](https://gitlab.com/boreec/gol_1)

## Games

### Pong

![Game view](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/boreec/Pong/master/img/game.png)

According to [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pong):
> Pong is a table tennis–themed twitch arcade sports video game, featuring
simple two-dimensional graphics, manufactured by Atari and originally released
in 1972.

<p align="justify">I made a reproduction of the popular Atari's arcade game.
This version is simplified as the ball's bounce goes only in 8 possible
directions (horizontal, vertical and diagonal).</p>

- **Tech Stack:** Rust, SDL2
- **Source Code:** [GitHub](https://github.com/boreec/Pong), [GitLab](https://gitlab.com/boreec/pong)
- **Demo:** [Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=FyqXscHFBu0)

### Snake

### Space Race

### Tetris
