content/posts/devlog-0002.md, before:

---
title: "devlog #2 - Map Switching System"
categories: [Pet Project]
tags: [bevy, devlog, ecs, roguelike, rust]
draft: true
---


If you've read the [devlog entry](/posts/devlog-0001) that I released in
January, you might have observed a change in the website's appearance since
then. Indeed, earlier the site images had a persistent shimmer, which appeared
to be a recurring issue with Jekyll's
[Chirpy](https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy). While there might
be a simple fix that I might have missed, I opted to switch to a complete 
different theme in the end!

The current website is now generated using [hugo](https://gohugo.io/), a really
fast and lightweight framework for building static website. Migrating the blog 
posts and pages was a swift process, given the limited amount of content I've
written so far.

Anyway, enough smalltalk, let's dive into this blog entry. This month I've
especially been focusing on implementing a way for the character to leave and
enter maps with a few extra.

1. [Content: A horse sprite](#content-a-horse-sprite)
2. [Final result](#final-result)
3. [Closing Thoughts](#closing-thoughts)

## Content: A horse sprite

## Final result

## Closing thoughts

Commit message:

chore: create a color palette section in devlog #2

content/posts/devlog-0002.md, after:

---
title: "devlog #2 - Map Switching System"
categories: [Pet Project]
tags: [bevy, devlog, ecs, roguelike, rust]
draft: true
---


If you've read the [devlog entry](/posts/devlog-0001) that I released in
January, you might have observed a change in the website's appearance since
then. Indeed, earlier the site images had a persistent shimmer, which appeared
to be a recurring issue with Jekyll's
[Chirpy](https://github.com/cotes2020/jekyll-theme-chirpy). While there might
be a simple fix that I might have missed, I opted to switch to a complete 
different theme in the end!

The current website is now generated using [hugo](https://gohugo.io/), a really
fast and lightweight framework for building static website. Migrating the blog 
posts and pages was a swift process, given the limited amount of content I've
written so far.

Anyway, enough smalltalk, let's dive into this blog entry. This month I've
especially been focusing on implementing a way for the character to leave and
enter maps with a few extra.

1. [Content: Settling on a color palette](#content-settling-on-a-color-palette)
1. [Content: A horse sprite](#content-a-horse-sprite)
2. [Final result](#final-result)
3. [Closing Thoughts](#closing-thoughts)

## Content: Settling on a color palette

Up until now, I have not put too much concern on the game appearance. Considering
the growing number of sprites, I thought it would be a good idea to decide on a color palette. The idea is to design sprites with a limited number
of colors that fit well together (think of a painter restricting the shades used).

To find a fitting color palette, I used [lospec.com]("https://lospec.com"),
which is a website where people post their color palette. I found one named
[RESURRECT 64](https://lospec.com/palette-list/resurrect-64), by Kerrie Lake.
I applied this palette4 to the tileset, which make the game looks less flashy
for sure.

{{<
    figure 
    src="/img/blog/devlog/roguelike-0014.png"
    title="before using a color palette"
>}}


{{<
    figure 
    src="/img/blog/devlog/roguelike-0015.png"
    title="after using a color palette"
>}}

## Content: A horse sprite

## Final result

## Closing thoughts
